Enterprise architecture (EA) is a description of an enterprise from an integrated busi-
ness and IT perspective. Enterprise architecture management (EAM) is a management
practice embracing all the management processes related to EA aiming to improve busi-
ness and IT alignment. EAM is typically described as a sequential four-step process:
(i) document the current state, (ii) describe the desired future state, (iii) develop the
transition plan and (iv) implement the plan. This traditional four-step approach to EAM
essentially defines the modern understanding of EA. Based on a literature review, this
paper demonstrates that this four-step approach to EAM, though practiced by some
companies, is inadequate as a model explaining the EAM phenomenon in general. As
a substitute, this paper synthesizes the generic conceptual model of EAM providing
a more realistic conceptualization of EAM describing it as a decentralized network of
independent but interacting processes, artifacts and actors.

Introduction
The role of IT for modern enterprises is significant. Companies spend considerable
amounts of money investing in IT. However, in order to realize the full potential
value of IT investments, the IT strategy of a company should be aligned with its
business strategy.1–3 Enterprise architecture (EA) is a description of an enterprise
from an integrated business and IT perspective recognized as an instrument for
facilitating business and IT alignment. Enterprise architecture management (EAM)
is a management practice embracing all the management processes related to EA
aiming to achieve business and IT alignment.4,5
Spewak and Hill6 presented the first comprehensive approach to EAM. They
describe EAM as a sequential step-wise project with essentially the following steps:
(i) document the current state of the whole enterprise in detail, (ii) describe the
desired future state of the whole enterprise in detail, (iii) develop the transition
plan describing how to migrate from the current state to the future state and
(iv) implement the plan. This traditional four-step approach to EAM was later supported by other authors7–10 who proposed its different variations. This approach
to EAM dominates and essentially defines the current EA literature since many
authors11–14 use it as a reference model of EAM in their research. Moreover, the tra-
ditional approach to EAM10 is considered as a de facto standard in EA practice.15–17
Therefore, the traditional four-step approach to EAM6 virtually became a standard
way to conceptualize and understand EAM in the mainstream EA literature.
However, following recommendations of the traditional approach to EAM often
leads to significant practical problems.18 Holst and Steensen19 even argue that a
successful EAM can hardly be established based on the mainstream EA literature.
The surveys20,21 show that only 45.1% of companies document both current and
future states and only 58% of companies produce roadmaps as advocated by the
traditional approach to EAM. The case studies of successful companies practicing
EA22,23 demonstrate that working EAM differs from the descriptions provided by
the popular EA literature.7,10 Moreover, many companies are too large to be com-
prehensively described and planned in a centralized manner as recommended by the
traditional approach to EAM.23 EAM should also be able to struggle with the envi-
ronmental instability,24–26 react on emergent needs27,28 and should be embedded
into normal organizational processes to be successful,18 however, the rigid tradi-
tional four-step approach to EAM hardly explains how it can be done.
Therefore, the traditional four-step approach to EAM, though widely supported
by the EA literature and practiced by some companies, is inadequate as a generic
conceptual model explaining the EAM phenomenon in general. However, no other
alternative models describing EAM have been presented in the EA literature. At the
same time, the lack of a commonly accepted conceptual model of EAM precludes
the EA research from deeper studies of this phenomenon. For instance, even EA
publications in the leading academic outlets analyze EAM only as a black box which
adds value to organizations,29 has some maturity30 and success factors,31 depends
on strategy32 and can be institutionalized,33 while the basic question on what EAM
is has no definite answers but is not discussed. Unsurprisingly, the inability of EA
theory to provide adequate answers to the basic questions leads to problems in EA
practice18,19 and results in poor success rates of EA initiatives.34–37
The inadequacy of the traditional four-step model of EAM as a generic con-
ceptual model and the lack of any alternative models serve as a motivation for
this paper. This paper, based on an extensive literature review, synthesizes the
generic conceptual model of EAM describing its essential elements. The resulting
model describes EAM as a decentralized network of independent but interacting
processes, artifacts and actors.
This paper continues as follows: (i) discusses the traditional approach to EAM,
its role in the EA literature and its problems, (ii) describes the review methodology,
(iii) discusses the review results, (iv) synthesizes the generic conceptual model of
EAM, (v) discusses the resulting model from different perspectives, (vi) describes
the contribution of the new model to the EA discipline and (vii) discusses the
limitations and directions for future research.